So in the previous video we started
looking at the if statement and
went through various conditional checks.
So we actually looked at the if,
the else, the elif and come up with
a simple scenario so you can see on
the screen a simple guess the number game.
But what I want to talk about now is
the situation where you want to test more
complicated conditions than
the simple ones we've used so far.
And Python actually gives you
the mechanism to produce quite
complex expressions when you're
actually doing some testing.
So what I'm going to do is delete
this code now, and start fresh.
And let's come up with a scenario.
So we'll type in age equals input.
Actually we'll put an int there first.
So int input, so
we're converting it to a number.
How old are you?
So what we can do is put,
if age greater than equal to 16.
You've seen something
similar to that before.
We had talked about the greater than
equal operator in the previous video.
But we can also expand that, we can put
int space age, less than equal to 65.
So what that does, that actually checks
to see whether the age is greater than or
equal to 16 and
that it's also less than and equal to 65.
So if we actually do that and
then we should do a print,
have a good day at work.
So obviously run that.
How old are you?
We can actually enter our value.
Add 9.
We put 15.
Nothing happens, and that's because
this condition wasn't fulfilled.
Because age was 15,
which failed this first part here, so
consequently nothing happened.
So if we run it again.
This time I'll put, say 25.
Have a good day at work.
So, it's looking for a number that's
within the ranges of greater than or
equal to 16 and less than equal to 65.
Now because the and has a lower priority
than the conditional operators,
this expression evaluates
as we would expect.
But if you want to be really clear
you can use parentheses to make it
obvious what you intended.
So what we could have done
is something like this.
We could have actually changed this,
used brackets.
Like so, and we've made it very clear.
And we'll still get the same result.
But it's now a lot clearer because
I've used those brackets what we
were trying to do.
It still actually works as you can see.
So the parentheses just to be clear
aren't necessary, but generally speaking,
it's a good idea to use them, especially
in complex conditional expressions.
And the reason that you want to
do that is it really makes it,
not only does it make it easy to read, but
if someone has to work on your code later,
the use of parentheses makes it obvious
to them what your intentions were.
So for that reason, I certainly highly
recommend brackets or parentheses.
Now Python also gives
you another scenario.
Instead of writing it
the way we've written there.
We can comment that out.
And we'll comment out just that one line.
And we can also do it like this.
We can put if 16, less than equal to age,
less than equal to 65.
Which is another way of actually
writing the thing, the same thing.
So we can actually do, on that and
just confirm if it's working.
We didn't get a message because
we're outside of the range, and 34,
we have gotten a message.
So you can see, there we're actually doing
a test to see whether the value 16 is less
than equal to age, and whether the value
65 is less than equal to age as well.
Making sure that it's actually within
the range that's been entered.
And there's actually even an easier
way that we could write this.
Instead of using less than equal,
we can actually change this and
put 15 less than age and less than 66.
So what we could do there is
we could actually run that.
How old are you if we're 15?
We don't get a message because
the range was greater than or
equal to 16 originally and less than 65.
Less than equal to 65.
If we put the age of 16,
have a good day at work.
So that's still actually working because
age is not less than 15 in this case and
we can actually change it again.
We can put 61 or 62,
have a good day at work, and
lastly 66 actually falls
outside of the range.
So that's possibly easy
to understand as well.
So the other thing we can do is we can
actually turn the condition around using
an or instead, so
I'm just gonna go ahead and do that.
Let's actually just comment
out all this code, so
I've just got the original age and
put at the top which is the same.
When you put something like
if age is less than 16 or
age is greater than 65,
print, enjoy your free time.
Else, print, have a good day at work.
So you can see what we've done there,
we've actually use an or to check whether
the age is less than 16 or it's greater
than 65 so if either of those expressions
turns out being true, this message is
gonna be printed, enjoy your free time.
Otherwise the else is gonna be invoked and
we should see the message,
have a good day at work.
So if you actually run that.
I'll just stop this and start this again.
How old are you?
So if I put 15, enjoy your free time.
Run it again.
And if I put 66, enjoy your free time.
And if I put a value in between 45,
have a good day at work.
So that's using an or.
And again the difference there was
with an end, with this line up here.
Both conditions have to be true,
so both what was in the parentheses
had to actually equate to true, for
that condition to be satisfied, but
in the case of or, it's either, has to be.
So we're checking here to see
if the age is less than 16 or
if it's greater than 65.
If either of those expressions
turns out to be true
then the message on
the next line is printed.
There's one important difference
though to actually using and and or.
When comparing conditions using and
Python is gonna stop checking as soon
as it finds a condition that's false.
Whereas comparing conditions using or,
it's going to stop as soon
as it finds one that's true.
So again in this case here, with the and,
if age wasn't greater than or
equal to 16 it wouldn't do anything else.
At that point that was
going to be a false.
If i just say 15 in our test it would stop
and it wouldn't actually start doing this
sort of doing this expression because the
other ones has already been proved to be
false but with an or
we're looking to one of these to be true.
So, if age is less than 16,
so again 15 was entered and
this expression is going to be
true because 15 is less than 16.
Only if that is false, so if say 25
was typed in, only then will the or
be actually checked to see whether
the age was also greater than 65.
So that's the important
difference between both.
And just as an example, if we type if,
we'll go back here actually,
start at the right indent level,
if some condition, or,
some weird function,
that does stuff hash do something.
So this example here which obviously is
not working because we haven't set these
things up,
some condition evaluates to true.
If that happens there's no need for
Python to execute the weird function
before deciding whether to do something.
So basically this can be very important
when we come to looking at classes but for
now it's just something to be aware of,
checking to see this first part,
whether that's gonna be executed
based on the actual value.
Now, Python, itself,
doesn't have a boolean data type.
And in other languages, Java for
example, there is a boolean data type
which you can set to true or false.
But what it does have,
it has two constants, true and false.
So as well as conditions
evaluating to true or false,
just about anything in Python can
also be tested in a condition.
And this can actually lead
to some strange results and
I'm gonna show you what I mean here.
So I'm gonna delete this code and
I'm gonna put x equals false.
X being a string.
If x, print.
X is true.
Now if we actually run that.
Comes back with x is true.
Now that may not have
been what you expected.
Perhaps you've looked at this and
you're wondering why we're showing true
when x was set to the value of false.
Well, in Python true is one and
false is zero.
But in a condition, any non-zero or
non-empty values will evaluate to true.
So because we've actually got the x
string set to a value, which in this
case is the value of false, it's going
to be evaluated as being returned true.
So if x is actually going to return to and
that's why when we run it,
we actually got the line of output.
So, more specifically, anything except
the following is gonna be true.
We're going to use the bull function, so
we can print out the results
to actually confirm this.
And I'm actually going to copy and
paste this code, and paste it in.
And I'm going to paste this in and
we're actually going to run it.
And you can see here in these scenarios,
when we're going to be finding out more
about these types variables, and basically
what I've done is I've just pasted in some
code, and I'll just bring it back to
the screen so we can actually read it.
And figured out what the values were for
each of them.
So the false, we're setting up the false,
if that's the case you can see we've
used a replacement field, and
it actually does return false.
Bull for none, none is another dial
type in Python that's also set to false.
A zero, so we do it using the bull
function to actually check
to see whether this returns a true or
false, and
you can see the various things here,
whether they return true or false,
in this case everything's returning
false because we're checking for empty.
And you probably don't know at this
stage what a list is, what a is and
we'll be talking about
that more in the future.
But for now it's just something to keep
in mind that as we progress through
the definitions that you
think might be the case with
as in the true example I gave you
may not the case in practice.
But I'll alert you to that
as we go through anyway.
And there's one exception to this and it's
possible to create a class that evaluates
to false, but there's probably enough
confusion without introducing anymore, so
I won't go into that in detail.
What this does, the reason that I brought
this up, it does allow you to create
conditions, such as this, so I'm going
to actually type in some more code.
So x equals input, please enter some text.
If x, print you entered.
.format, and it's gonna be x,
else print, you did not enter anything.
So if we actually run this,
please enter some text.
Or I'll just press enter.
You did not enter anything.
But if I actually enter some text,
Tim was here, you entered Tim was here.
So this can actually result in simpler
code, but probably at this stage,
I'd recommend you'd avoid it until
you're more comfortable with Python.
Now before we actually finish with
conditions there's two more key words
that we need to look at.
The first is not which just
reverses a true or false value.
Not true equals false and
not false equals true.
So for example, we can put print
not false, print not true.
So we actually run that.
You get true for the first one and
false for the second one.
So basically it just reverses
whatever the count scenario was.
So in this case false would normally
return zero, where false is a zero,
as you recall from
earlier in this lecture.
Not false is gonna return true.
Likewise, for true, not or
the inverse of that is going to be false.
So based on that, what we could have done,
if we go back to our earlier voting check.
We could do something like age
equals int input, how old are you?
So you can put something like
if not age less than 18.
Print.
Not old enough to vote.
Please put an X in the box.
Else, print, please come back, in
years, and
of course it was .format, 18-age.
So if you run that now, how old are you?
If I put in 15,
please come back in three years.
That's because it's
performing this check now.
If not age less than 18, so
age less than 18 would be true in this
case because age was less than 18.
But not is the inverse of that,
so the inverse of that would be,
we're looking for an age in this
case that is actually 18 or higher.
If not age less than 18,
in this case being 15,
and that evaluates effectively as false,
and it comes back and
actually shows how old you are, and
please come back in three years.
Run that again, we put 21,
you're old enough to vote,
and that's because age
less than 18 is false and
then not, which is the inverse of that,
converts the false to the true and that's
why we can actually see that message
showing on the screen for that reason.
So sometimes, and this is not one of them,
it makes sense to check for
a condition not being true.
And then not a keyword
allows you to do that.
And you'll see more examples of not and so
forth as we go through in the actual OS.
We go through the course.
Now in is another keyword and
it's used in sequences,
and we make more use of it when we come
back to look at lists in a later section,
but one list that we have used though is a
string, which is a sequence of characters,
so let's have a look at the in keyword for
that.
So we're gonna start with parent, so
what I'll do is I'm just
gonna paste this code in.
I'm gonna do that and
I'm gonna paste it in.
But, for
some reason hasn't pasted it properly.
This is a good example of how
sometimes things don't get pasted
in correctly to spaces.
So, you've got to just
check your spaces and
your tabs to make sure things
have been correctly put in.
And you can see that basically intelliJ
is quite happy to tell us that things
aren't correct.
So, you can just go back and delete.
So start like that and
then press tab which fixes it.
We could just remove
the offending characters.
So again, you find that it's quite
common when you're actually copying and
pasting code from other place,
and I did allude to that earlier.
It's how I actually go about fixing it.
So in this case, we've set up a string
called parent, we're actually looking for
a letter, and
if that letter is actually in parent,
in other words if it's contained
within the parent stream,
that's what the in keyword does,
we can actually print out that message.
Otherwise, I'm gonna say
I don't need that letter.
So if I actually run
this into a character.
So if we put, o, for example.
Give me an o, Bob.
And that's because if letter,
the letter we typed in was o,
if that's in the parent, which it does,
that's actually in there.
So that's good.
So that worked.
And we'll just try another one.
We'll try a b.
Now you might be thinking well hang on
there's a B there, why didn't that work?
Well, that's because that's a capital B.
Capital B for blue there.
And doing a comparison as far
as the N key word is concerned
that letter is different.
So an uppercase B is
different to a lowercase b.
If I type the uppercase B,
give me a B Bob.
It actually does work.
And also if we enter a letter
that's not in there like a z,
I don't need that letter, so
it actually comes up quite correctly and
doesn't actually match anything.
Now you can also use a not
in that example so we put,
at the moment we put if letter in parent
we can actually change that to put if not
in parent then we would have to
change the prints around, so go look.
So ready to put the other
print here in that scenario
because we're actually doing a not test so
we're going to get the reverse results.
So if we actually run this again put z, I
don't need that letter, which is correct.
Or if you put a B in,
we actually get a correct response.
So that's it.
So I'm going to end this video here.
In the next video it's time for
your first challenge.
So what I'm going to do is give you a
challenge to come up with an answer to and
it's gonna help you understand, or
by actually completing that challenge
it's gonna help you understand
what you've learned in this video and
the previous video.
So I'll see you in that next video.